<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "/sw/share/xml/dtd/docbookx/4.5.0/docbookx.dtd">

<refentry id="packchr">

<refentryinfo>
<author>
<firstname>Kent</firstname>
<surname>Hansen</surname>
</author>
</refentryinfo>

<refmeta>
<refentrytitle>packchr</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</refmeta>

<refnamediv>
<refname>packchr</refname>
<refpurpose>finds unique tiles in a NES character (CHR) file</refpurpose>
</refnamediv>

<refsynopsisdiv>
<cmdsynopsis>
<command>packchr</command>
<arg choice="opt" rep="repeat">
  <option>option</option>
</arg>
<arg choice="req">file</arg>
</cmdsynopsis>
</refsynopsisdiv>

<refsect1><title>Description</title>
<para>
<command>packchr</command> reads a raw NES character (CHR) file and
finds the tiles (i.e. 16-byte blocks) that are unique. It also
generates a nametable file (a file containing indexes of the tiles),
so that the original graphic can be reconstructed.
</para>
<para>
As a basic illustration of what packchr does, assume that the input is
a character file containing the following tiles (each letter
represents an 8x8-pixel tile):
</para>
<para>
AAABBCDEBBBBBDDAAAABABA
</para>
<para>
packchr will create a character file with duplicates stripped:
</para>
<para>
ABCDE
</para>
<para>
and a nametable file indexing the unique tiles (0=A, 1=B, and so on):
</para>
<para>
0 0 0 1 1 2 3 4 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>Options</title>
<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--nametable-base</option>=<parameter>num</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <parameter>num</parameter> as nametable base tile index; i.e. the
first tile will be referenced as <parameter>num</parameter> in the
nametable, the second as <parameter>num</parameter>+1, etc.; by
default the nametable base is 0.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--null-tile</option>=<parameter>num</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <parameter>num</parameter> as implicit null tile index; that is,
don't produce any character data for a 'blank' tile.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--character-output</option>=<parameter>file</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Store character data with duplicate tiles removed
in <parameter>file</parameter>.  If this option is not specified, the
data will be written to <literal>packchr.chr</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--character-size</option>=<parameter>size</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Pad the resulting character data to <parameter>size</parameter> bytes if
necessary.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--nametable-output</option>=<parameter>file</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Store nametable in <parameter>file</parameter>. If this option is not specified,
the data will be written to <literal>packchr.nam</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--verbose</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Print progress information to standard output.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--help</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Give a help list.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--usage</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Give a short usage message.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--version</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Print program version.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Files</title>
<refsect2>
<title>Output</title>
<para>
The packchr output consists of two parts: One is the character data,
stripped of duplicate tiles. The other part is the nametable data,
which is a series of bytes containing tile indexes. Together, these
two pieces of data can be used to reconstruct the original graphic
(the input to packchr).
</para>
</refsect2>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Examples</title>
<para>
To pack <literal>myimage.chr</literal>:
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
packchr myimage.chr
</userinput>
</para>
<para>
To pack <literal>myimage.chr</literal> and store the output in given files:
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
packchr --character-output=nodupes.chr --nametable-output=mynametab.nam myimage.chr
</userinput>
</para>
<para>
To pack <literal>myimage.chr</literal> and transpose the tile indexes in the nametable by 0x80:
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
packchr --nametable-base=0x80 myimage.chr
</userinput>
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>See Also</title>
<para>
packnam(1)
</para>
</refsect1>

</refentry>
