<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "/sw/share/xml/dtd/docbookx/4.5.0/docbookx.dtd">

<refentry id="xm2nes">

<refentryinfo>
<author>
<firstname>Kent</firstname>
<surname>Hansen</surname>
</author>
</refentryinfo>

<refmeta>
<refentrytitle>xm2nes</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</refmeta>

<refnamediv>
<refname>xm2nes</refname>
<refpurpose>converts Fasttracker ][ eXtended Module (XM) files to Kent's NES music format</refpurpose>
</refnamediv>

<refsynopsisdiv>
<cmdsynopsis>
<command>xm2nes</command>
<arg choice="opt" rep="repeat">
  <option>option</option>
</arg>
<arg choice="req">file</arg>
</cmdsynopsis>
</refsynopsisdiv>

<refsect1><title>Description</title>
<para>
<command>xm2nes</command> reads an eXtended Module (XM) file and
converts it to the format used by Kent's NES music player.
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1><title>Options</title>
<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--output</option>=<parameter>file</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Store the output in <parameter>file</parameter>.
If this option is not specified, the output will be written to
standard output.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--channels</option>=<parameter>channels</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Only process the channels defined by the list of <parameter>channels</parameter>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--instruments-map</option>=<parameter>file</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Reads instrument mapping information from <parameter>file</parameter>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--label-prefix</option>=<parameter>prefix</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Prefix 6502 assembly labels by <parameter>prefix</parameter>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--order-start</option>=<parameter>offset</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Start reading pattern order table from <parameter>offset</parameter>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--order-end</option>=<parameter>offset</parameter>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Stop reading pattern order table at <parameter>offset</parameter>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--verbose</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Print progress information to standard output.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--help</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Give a help list.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--usage</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Give a short usage message.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<option>--version</option>
</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Print program version.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Files</title>
<refsect2>
<title>Instrument Mapping File</title>
<para>
This input file is optional; it enables custom mapping of input
instruments to output instruments. The file is a plaintext file, each
line containing one or more name:value pairs. Example:
</para>
<para>
source:10 target:0 transpose:-6
</para>
<para>
The above line tells the converter to map instrument 10 in the
input to instrument 0 in the output, and to transpose each note
for that instrument by -6 in the output.
</para>
</refsect2>
<refsect2>
<title>Output</title>
<para>
The output is assembly source code.
</para>
</refsect2>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Examples</title>
<para>
To convert <literal>mysong.xm</literal>:
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
xm2nes mysong.xm
</userinput>
</para>
<para>
To convert only channels 0 and 2 of <literal>mysong.xm</literal>:
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
xm2nes --channels=0,2 mysong.xm
</userinput>
</para>
<para>
To convert only the order table range [3,5] of <literal>mysong.xm</literal>,
and call the result "middle":
</para>
<para>
<userinput>
xm2nes --order-start=3 --order-end=5 --label-prefix=middle mysong.xm
</userinput>
</para>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Unsupported Effects</title>
<para>
The following effects are not supported, or only partially supported,
in this version. Unsupported effects are ignored by the converter.
</para>
<para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
8 (set panning position). The NES audio hardware doesn't support panning.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
9 (set sample offset). (Would make sense to implement for DMC.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
B (position jump).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
D (pattern break).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
E. Only EC (note cut) is supported.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
G and above.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</refsect1>

</refentry>
